(upbeat music)
So we learnt about forEach
and forEach is handy for when you wanna
loop over some data and do something
with each piece of data.
Whether that's logging the value,
whether that's attaching an event listener for a click,
whether it's displaying the data on the page,
those are often referred to as things called side effects
and a side effect is when you are inside of a function
and you reach outside of that function to do something else.
So, whether that's attaching an event listener,
maybe putting some data on the page,
and while side effects are totally fine,
because at some point you do need to put these things
on the page or show them in the console
or attach an event listener,
there are a whole slew of other types of loops
that are simply taking in data,
doing something with that data,
and then returning that data that has been modified
massaged or transformed in some way.
So, that is where we're going
to get into Map, Filter and Reduce.
So, we talk about taking in data,
this could be filtering data,
it could be looking for something that you want,
it could be, like we've already done
one example of this and that is find.
You take in an array and you return one thing.
That is a transformation of that data
and those are often referred to as pure functions.
Meaning they take in data, they return data,
they always work exactly the same way
given the data that's inputted,
it returns the exact same thing
and they don't reach outside themselves to do that.
So, let's talk about Map.
Map is like a machine in a factory.
It takes in data, performs an operation
and spits it out on the other side.
Map will always produce the same length
of the array as it starts with.
So let's go into a little simple example right now.
First thing I'm going to do,
I'm just going to console.clear,
to get all these toppings out of my way.
Good, we clear the console out.
Now, I said mapping is kind of like a machine
that takes in some data
and does something with that data
and then spits it out the other end.
And I always love this analogy of just like
a machine that works on toys
and adds a left arm, and the right arm and hand,
and something like that.
So, let's show you a real simple example like that.
So, we've got these faces, array of different faces
and let's create some functions
that we can map over each one.
So if we make a function called addArms,
it takes in a face and from that,
let's just return the emoji of wave
and I'm going to put two of 'em,
space space,and then in the middle of that
I'll put the face.
Okay, so, that, that's just the function,
we've probably written a 100 of 'em.
and if we run it and say addArms,
and run it with a face,
(laughs) that's was sad.
But okay, it works, right.
Like we've just taken in data
and we've returned it with two waving hands
on either side, right.
That's, is a pretty simple thing.
Now what we can do is,
we can take the list of faces
and add arms to all of them.
And this is how it works.
We'll say const toys
is equal to faces.map
and then we addArms.
And then when we console.log the toys,
what it returns to us is an array of the exact same
length as we put it in, like,
anytime you have a map, you put in a eight things,
you always get eight back.
You put in a hundred, you always get a hundred back.
There's no way to return less or more items with the Map.
You simply take in something,
and you return something else.
So, another simple example that we have here could be,
if I have wes and
kait and poppy,
and I want to map over each person
and add bos to it.
I could say const fullNames
is equal to, and we'll map over it
and we'll take a name and we will return the name
with the bos added to the end
so I'm going to use a back tick
and interpolate that variable
add a space, bos, then return it.
Now, if I console.log fullNames,
we have wes bos, kait bos and poppy bos.
So, you see how I'm saying it's a machine
where it takes in three things
and then transforms each piece of that data in some way
and in our case it's just adding on bos.
We could do multiple transforms on it.
So, let's let's make this into a function here.
So, make function bosify.
And it will take in the name
and return back ticks,
the name with Bos on the end,
capital b in this time.
And now I'll return bosify.
So, now we've got wes Bos, kait Bos and poppy Bos.
But now, the first names don't have capitals on them.
So I can make another function called capitalize
and that is going to to take in
a word and we can,
how would we return it?
We can, the first letter of a word
will always, we can access it with zero,
because strings kind of work like arrays do.
If I have a string of wes
and I do square brackets zero,
that gives us W, E and S.
So, if I were to return
the word zero.toUpperCase,
let's try that so far.
So, now before map, we're going to add another map
and I'm going to pass it to capitalize.
So, you see what's happening here is that
you can chain maps on each other
because this is an array
from which you can call map on
and that will return another array,
which you can then chain a map on it,
often we'll write our code like this,
where we just put one on every single line
and you pipe it through three or four different transforms
each with their own little function.
Now,if I refresh this you'll see
W Bos,K Bos and P Bos, so that's good.
We've got the first letter going.
And then I want to return
the rest of it which would be word.slice one.
Because the slice works the same way as an array does
on a string where you can take everything from one to three
but I'm going to just return one to the end.
I'm using plus here
and let's just make sure this works.
here we go, Wes Bos, Kait Bos and Poppy Bos.
let's turn that into back ticks
'cause, remember how we said we don't like
to use the plus operator
because that's for adding,
not for attaching strings together,
what's the word I'm looking for?
Concatenating strings together.
So, I'm going to turn that into one big string
and then we'll just use dollar curly around that one,
get rid of that plus and then dollar curly around that one
let's see if that works, oh!
It didn't, what happened?
Now, oh, there's a space we don't need.
There's space there because,
there we go, that's looking good.
So Map will always take in an item do some work with it
and then return the new value.
Same thing works with numbers.
So if we have, I think we actually up here,
we've got a list of totals.
Let's say we want to add tax to all of them.
So we could say const orderTotalsWithTax
is equal to orderTotals.map,
and then we'll get a total.
And from each, like watch, I could just return one here
and what's going to happen, console.log, orderTotals,
every item has now been turned into one.
Why? Because whatever you return from your map function
will replace whatever was initially in your map function.
It's not mutable, meaning it's not going
to, our order totals are still there, right.
And our full names are still there.
But the new array will have the updated value.
So what we can do is return the total times
one decimal one three, that's what tax is here in Ontario
and now we refresh it.
You'll see we now have our values with the tax added to them
this is how math works in JavaScript
and in a lot of programming languages.
I've talked about that in the numbers one as well.
So, I find Map to be extremely helpful
I even wrote this, I'm just going to paste this in here
'cause I thought this was pretty silly to do.
So there's this kind of thing on Twitter,
where people will make cowboys
out of different emojis.
So, lemme show you how it works first.
(laughs) So, what I have done here
is I've taken our faces array which is all of these emojis,
I have looped over each one,
and for each one I've passed
the face to our attachBody function,
along with whatever I want the body to be made up of.
And then that will return us a new array
and then for each of those
I just console.log them into the console
to see how they work
and in here this is simply just a function
that takes in what is their face
and what is their body made out of,
and it uses back ticks so I can use multiple lines here
and it places their face in there
and then it takes their body which is in this case
it's going to be a string of fries
and repeats it three times.
I'm not sure if I shown you that yet,
but if you take a letter and you type repeat on the end
you can pass it however many you'd like it to repeat
and it will show you that.
This is another kind of a cool thing.
Remember we looked at the Array.from,
this is an Array.fill method.
If you say something like array dot,
Array three, it gives you three empty spots in a ray.
Much like Array.from, but if you want to fill them
with the exact same thing,
this is a bit of a quicker way to do it,
versus the from and map function that we looked at.
So in my case I could fill it with an x,
now I have three spots with an x.
And in our case I'm just filling it with an emoji.
And then calling join with a space separator on it.
And that gives us the actual body of the person.
Then I do that a few more times in there.
(laughs) I'll leave that in there in case it's kinda
interesting to look at, kind of funny.
This is kind of a silly thing
so don't feel like that was a real thing
but I thought I would show it to you
because sometimes, when I want a little bit of a break
this is the kind of stuff that I build
'cause it's kinda interesting to me
and I feel like it makes me a bit
of a better JavaScript evolver.
Now, Map can also be used for any type of data.
We've looked at an example with strings,
we've looked at an example with numbers
where we calculated some money,
but more often than not
you're actually going to have an array of objects
that comes back from an API.
So, let's take a look up here.
I've got this array of people here
and each person is signified by an object
and each person has a birthday, a name object
with a nested first and last property inside of that.
Now, what I want to do is, that data is okay,
but it's not in the format that I need it,
and this happens all the time.
The API comes back with a bunch of data,
your database has a bunch of data
and it's not exactly in the format
that you need it to do your work.
So what you have to do is you have to take in this data,
you have to massage it a little bit,
I got fingers in the air right now massaging that data
and then return the new formatted data that we want.
So, let's go ahead and do that.
Go over down here and we'll say const cleanPeople
is equal to people.map,
and we're going to, let's do it in line here
'cause this is pretty common thing you see as well.
That function is going to give you a person
and you're more than welcome
to console.log the person inside of a map function
just don't ever do things like
go off and update the dom inside of a map function.
that's what a forEach is for.
And we'll do that a lot more in our examples.
Now, first thing we're gonna do is get their birthday,
and then figure out how old they are
and then we want to return their full name
and b-day in an object.
So, first we had to get their birthday.
So, their birthday is stored in a string
and that's not all that helpful to us
because when you want to work with dates in JavaScript
actually has to be changed over
to what's called the JavaScript date.
So, I'm going to show you how we can do that in here.
So we'll say const birthday is equal to new date
and if you don't pass, when you create a date in JavaScript,
if you don't pass it anything,
it's just going to give you the date.
This is the date that I'm recording, that's right now.
and if you don't pass it a string of a date
it's just going to use whatever
the current time is as a date.
But if you do pass it a date like person.birthday,
and you can console.log the birthday,
you'll see that for each person, we log the person
and then it actually logs a true JavaScript date
for us, Thursday, April 22, 1933.
We don't pass it hours or seconds,
if that's not, if that's the case,
it just does that at midnight.
Now we want to figure out how old they are.
So we also need to know what is right now.
So, we could say const now is equal to new date
and now we've got sort of two different
JavaScript date objects
and go ahead and look at them,
let's console.log birthday
and now get rid of this log of person.
You see I've got three different dates showing up.
Now, that's okay and when you log it to the console,
it just gives you the string
but there are a number of methods on a date
that will allow you to work with it.
So what I like to do when I need to compare dates
or figure out how much time is in between two dates
is to, is change them to what I call timestamps,
that's what they are called.
so if you, let's create a date const now
is equal to new date,
and if we take now and we say get time,
it's going to return to us as random number that
is actually not random at all.
But this is the number of milliseconds
since God created the earth.
And it's actually the number of milliseconds since like
January 1, 1970 something like that.
And that's at the time where
they said okay, this is when date starts.
And any dates that are negative go back from that point
in time and any dates that are positive
go forward from that time and there's actually a shortcut
to get that you just say Date.now
and every time you run it's going to change
because time is constantly getting, moving forward
and these will always grow and grow and grow.
So if you ever have one of these timestamps
you can go to this website epoch.now.sh,
it's E-P-O-C-H dot now dot S-H
and it allows you to do both things.
You can convert like any date in the future
or in the past to a timestamp,
JavaScript deals with milliseconds,
so you always want to work with that.
Some other languages just deal in seconds.
JavaScript always deals in milliseconds.
And you can do the opposite,
where if you were to paste in a number of milliseconds,
it will convert it back to a regular date for you.
So if we take this time stamp and paste it in here,
it will tell us that i made that time stamp out
October 25th at 2:39:18 PM, okay.
So we want to convert these not to just date objects
but to full blown timestamps.
So we're just going to call the getTime method on that
and we'll just say timestamp,
and then here, we can say now timestamp,
and we won't do a new date, we'll just say Date.now.
That's just a little convenience method
that is built into it.
Wait, hold on.
What do you call these methods that live on the Mama?
You're right, static methods.
They're called static methods because they don't exist
on every single date.
They only exist on the Mama object that's in there.
So we have the birthday and we have now
and then we're going to find out
what the difference is between the two.
So, we will say const age is equal to now minus birthday,
and let's just console.log the age for each person.
So that's how old each people are in milliseconds.
So this is now needs to be converted into years.
and ask yourself how many milliseconds are in a year.
Well, there's a 1000 milliseconds in a second,
there's 60 seconds in a minute,
there's 60 minutes in an hour,
and there are 24 hours in a day,
and there are 365 days in the year.
That will give us 31 billion 536 million seconds.
and there's other ways to do dates
that will account for leap years and things like that
but this is probably the simplest
way to do it in this tutorial.
There's whole libraries out there,
I highly recommend checking out a library
called date functions, date-fns.
And they give you a whole bunch of robust tools
for actually working with dates
and figuring out time between two different dates.
For now, we're going to deal with that.
So we'll take this now minus birthday,
and we will divide it by that number that we have there
and now we'll see what age somebody is.
So 26, 44 and 75 and then we've got these kind of like, meh,
like how many months is that, right?
So what we'll do is we'll just take
the lower bound of that number
because obviously they haven't hit their next birthday yet
and you would say that you're 26 years old.
so how would we take the lower bound of any number?
It's not round 'cause you don't round up
to say how old you are you.
You take the lower bound and that is with Math.floor,
grab the entire thing in a Math.floor
and then it tells us person is 26, 44 and 75, okay.
Now, we we got their birthday,
figured out how old they are,
and now we wanna return their full name
and b-day in an object.
So we'll just return an object
where their age is going to be the age variable
and then the name is going to be,
or get some back ticks here,
and we'll say the person.named.first, space
person.name.last.
And it's really important that you return this value here.
Also you might be screaming at me,
if the property that you're returning
is the same name as the variable that you're returning,
just do it like that.
So, now we take these cleanPeople
and we can console.table the cleanPeople.
And boom!
"Cannot read first of undefined line 195",
person.name.first,
so what's wrong with my data here,
let's go look at it.
Oh it's names, not name.
So that's a bit of an issue.
I thought the property was called names but it's not.
So we'll go back down there and we'll put an s there.
And oh, okay, I will put one there too.
There we go, so we have our index, our age
and their full name just in a string version.
So again that is what Map does.
Takes in some data that doesn't look exactly how you like it
then you could do a bunch of data massaging
and then spit it out the other end.